Project Management Phases: What are the Five Stages of Project Management?

A project management process involves huge planning and forecasting at the initial stages. There may be more than a dozen tasks which may have to be tended to. Take a help of an experienced project manager and they will always suggest to you that it is always best to tend to a project in parts or phases rather than making it move about together. Here are five project management phases which you will find in the modules of every project management software:

1. Project Initiation

This is the first step in the lifecycle of a project. Measuring the value and feasibility of the project is intended at this step. Most project management software makes use of two tools to make this evaluation which is the business case document and the feasibility study. These steps lay down the need for a project, its potential financial benefits, and an evaluation of the goals and timeline of the project. Projects may be abandoned if they are deemed unprofitable but if they pass these two steps, they can be carried forward for implementation.

2. Project Planning

Once a project is assessed for its feasibility, it would require adequate planning to create a budget and allocate resources which would determine how the project would be implemented. Project managers can also make use of project management software to define the stages of planning.

3. Project Execution

Project managers are most interested in and concerned with this step in the whole project management cycle. This is the step where they are required to build the deliverables which are expected to satisfy the customer. Remember that the execution phase will turn out to be a success only if the planning stage is a success. A project plan largely directs the outcome of project execution.

4. Project Monitoring and Control

Sometimes, monitoring and control activities go hand in hand with the execution stage. This is because, once a project plan is executed, it would require constant monitoring and control activities to ensure that the project plan is moving as intended. This is where the scope for modifications and changes arises and the alterations of scope may materialize here. The importance of this step can be understood when an overall view of the project is taken by the manager. This is the step which ensures that the promised deliverables are actually being delivered and every step is being taken to keep a track of the performance of the team.

5. Project Closure

When a project is delivered to the customer, it is ideally considered complete, at which point, it is considered curtailed. Stakeholders of the project are communicated about the completion of the project so that resources can be diverted to other channels. At this stage, the team can document the entire process, how it was executed, and what steps were taken to control the deviation in the plan. This helps in avoiding costly mistakes in the future and controlling the actions of the team for future projects.

Primary Functions of A Project Management Software

Project planning
Task management
Document collaboration and sharing
Calendar and contact sharing
Reporting
Project management system provides the function of sharing, handling and administration of documents, archives and other information sorts among a few clients or systems. These PM tools permit two or more remote clients to jointly deal with a project or task

Project management software is basically intended to improve productivity within a group of people and, more specifically, within an organization. This is accomplished through the coordinated assignments processing and administration capabilities provided by this kind of project tracking tools.

With skills like project and collaboration management, clients can create a workspace and include information and/or workflows to it. The created workspace is accessible and viewable for all assigned users, no matter what location he is operating from. Any changes made to the information or documents are synced up in everyone's pc, guaranteeing that everybody has the most updated variant of an ongoing project.

How do you strategize all the projects assigned to you in your Company? How do you perform a thorough study of the plans?

Even though you can employ the finest project management experts for your projects, there is a project management software that can accomplish and simplify your projects and work. Yes, I'm talking about Project Management tools. Best project tracking apps offer the virtual image of the entire project, project depth analytics, the budget issues, and even the management planning.

So, what exactly is a project management tool? It is a software that combines scheduling, planning, estimation, budget and financial plan management. Furthermore, it manages the resource allocation, time tracking, communication, collaboration, and the list is endless. Creative project management applications online propose noteworthy paybacks to the customers and to the team as they improve the output and performance of the project handling teams.

There are many online project management tools available at the moment with numerous features and options.

Project management system software typically has these objects of info for input:

Beginning date of every action
Timeline of each action
Needs of each action
Resources available
Stage to avail the resources
Project Management Software helps into Which Tasks?

There are a lot of simple project management apps and software that are used to address the following tasks:

Schedule and handling events which hinge on each other in diverse ways.
Being capable to schedule the numerous participants of the project, together with precise tasks for every participant.
The aptitude to forecast and deal with backup conditions that might rise all through the project.
Making sure that errands are over on time and that fresh tasks are allocated to each participant.
Types of Project Management Software

There are different types of project management software for small businesses out there depending on user preferences and the type of project into which the software will be put into.

Among the different types of software we will be looking at include:

Desktop programs: Project management tools in the form of desktop programs are useful in corporate environments. Businesses can install and use them on their personal computers, servers or laptops. They are available online for free (freemium versions) or proprietary systems that come at a fee.
Mobile applications: Thanks to the evolution of technology, businesses of today can manage their projects through specialized mobile apps. These apps may be quite suitable for specific uses like in administrative functions, communication, and collaboration. For example, according to research published on Science Direct revealed that about 50% of mobile PM applications support the execution of project management processes while about 46% provide administration functions.
Web-based applications: These are project management applications hosted online. Today's web-based Software as a Service (SaaS) applications are effective in project portfolio management, project management, and project management information systems (PMIS). Their design caters to business managers who want to utilize the power of the Internet in managing their projects.
Visual tools: Information visualization software come in handy when it comes to addressing problems associated with understanding and viewing large project data sets. These tools allow users to search for, evaluate and edit their data. They also mitigate information overload, which is a common problem in some projects.
Single-user programmable systems: These systems work under the premise that only one user has the authorization to edit the contents of a project. They are commonly used by small businesses manned by a small professional team.
Personal applications: These applications are useful in home settings to manage home or lifestyle projects. They have a simple user interface and require little to no technical skills to maneuver. For instance, homeowners can use them to plan for weight loss programs or track their food consumption habits.
Collaborative programmable systems: As their name suggests, these systems support multiple users, unlike the single-user programmable systems. This means that several users can take part in editing parts of a project at once. They rely on a database to synchronize all changes that the users make on given data.
Features of Project Management Software

Project management is an indispensable part and chief distress for any commercial organization. A project management tool is a collaborative software that gets the clientele and employees on the same page.

By means of a project management system, businesses can effortlessly achieve their work online and access it from anywhere and anytime. Project tracker tool is a single podium through which targets can be attained effectively with comfort. Here are some of the features you might want to consider when purchasing project management software solutions:

Shared team calendar: Time is of the essence in every project. A team calendar helps project managers with scheduling and organizing meetings. The good thing about having a shared calendar that synchronizes with the most popular calendar tools, for example, Outlook, Gmail, iCal among others ensures that everyone receives notifications and attends meetings on time. The calendar also helps you point out critical due dates to your project team so that they may have a quick idea of the milestones ahead of them.
File sharing: One of the features of the top software is the file sharing feature. As such, once a team member inserts (or uploads) information into the system, others people in the team can quickly have access to it, whenever they need, and wherever they are. When you start choosing your project management software, always
Team dashboards: A project management software is all about making the work easier. To make it easier, the software needs to be able to create team dashboards accessible to all members of the team. That way, teams can easily share or retrieve charts, add graphs, visual metrics and a host of other key performance indicators (KPIs) in your dashboard. The team dashboard, which can serve as a project KPI report can be used during meetings when you want to present your tracked metrics or comparing results with regard to the planned schedule.
Increased visibility: It becomes easier to run the project when all the data is accessible in one place. That way, completed tasks, planned tasks, upcoming calendar events, project resources, customer data, bills and other expenses can be accessed with a single click. So you don't need to waste time switching between multiple spreadsheets on the lookout for different bits of data. Look out for PM tools software that includes (or can integrate well with) invoice automation and customer relationship management(CRM).
Customizable reports: The best tool should be able to generate reports. It should include apps that collect your teams previously inserted project data and use the data for creating customizable reports. For example, you will be required to create reports on your expenses, budget, the tasks you have already completed and performance of a member of your team. Since you will always have to gather a lot of data along the course of project execution, all you need to do is to choose the parameters and information that you would like to use to prepare for graphs or charts. From the reports, you can easily identify the over-utilized or underutilized resource and adjust accordingly.
Virtual Dashboard: PM tools lets you achieve access to a user-friendly dashboard. The dashboard enables you to see an impression of all the tasks, problems, the status of tasks, etc. related to any particular project at one single place.
Project Planner: The project-planning wizard available in the project management software allows the user to plan, set up and allocate a fresh project with no trouble whatsoever. The user or the Admin can know the status of projects and sub-tasks in real time. He/she can even add and remove jobs during the course of the whole project.
Time Tracking: Whether you are working on the customer orders exclusively or if you need your team to track their own timelines, an apt project management tools is all you need. By means of the virtual time tracking feature available in the project management and collaboration software, you can do so from the cozy comforts of your home.
Expense Tracking: Tracking expenditures and financial plan for any kind of project, whether separate or business-related is essential to ensure that you are not overspending. Expense tracking can let you establish incoming revenue, outgoing expenditures and even periodic expenses related to the Projects.
Advantages of Project Management Software

PM tools can assist you to improve your Company's everyday processes. Having this kind of software in place would permit you to have access to additional analytics as well. This will, in turn, make your company more productive.

Helps Attain The Project Objectives
Online project management applications enable you to receive the maximum productivity from the projects as it helps in successfully executing the projects on time and in good quality. It even assists Project Managers to create an appropriate scheduling plan for his/her team. Subsequently, the software assists in overseeing the entire team effortlessly.
One Can Check The Project Growth From Anywhere, Anytime
Besides being able to oversee the team members and the real-time status of the projects they are working on, you can also interact with your team members about the projects. Discussing project issues and queries become very easy with project management tools. Moreover, you can screen the performance of each team member. So, if you catch any team member to be late, you can shift that member to another less important project, and as a result, evade any delay in projects.
Best Way To Avail The Expected Outcomes
The software allows managers to allocate the workload as per the competence of each human resource. The software has numerous tools which help in activities and time management. This consists of network diagrams, spreadsheets, Gantt charts, etc. The project management system is the best way to confirm savings in time, resources and money. It can lead to output gains and elimination of miscellaneous expenses.
Drawbacks of Project Management Tools

Project management software is not a cure-all. In fact, a bad project management system can deter the development of critical projects. Even though there are noticeably good reasons to exploit project management tools, there are a few drawbacks as well:

The Staff Needs To Be Trained
You have to train the staff on the correct use of the project management software. You will have to put in training for everybody. Nevertheless, with an easy to use project management software interface, the training would be negligible.
Does Not Substitute Remarkable Management Skills
Almost all Managers wish to discover a sure-shot recipe for a successful project. However, no project management software can actually substitute the expertise of a great Project Manager.
May Make Simple Projects Complicated
A Project Manager can at no cost depend solely on any software for successfully completing the projects. It may produce a work setting that is conquered by disorder and confusion. The misuse of the software can also make simple projects complicated.
Management vs Execution
Project management and project execution are two different sides of the same coin. Project Managers have to visualize beyond the software. You have to confirm that the staff is succeeding on their projects within the stipulated time frames, and this can be done manually only.
Inflexibility
Business projects are extremely fluid by nature. They demand relentless alterations and modifications. Don't let yourself and your colleagues to be so dependent on the software that you aren't able to make modifications when required.
